{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang2057{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Emoji;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 he following table draws heavily from a peer-reviewed study on pastoralist knowledge  and a detailed veterinary science textbook , among other authoritative sources.\par
\par
Disease (Also Known As)\tab Species Affected\tab Key Symptoms & Signs\tab Treatment\tab Precautions & Prevention\tab Recovery Guidelines for Farmers\par
Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) \tab Cattle, Goats, Sheep\tab Symptoms: Excessive salivation, runny nose, wounds/sores on hooves and mouth, lethargy, not feeding, drop in milk production. Signs: Highly contagious, rapid spread through the herd.\tab Tetracycline antibiotics (e.g., Terramycin).\tab Vaccination is key. Strict quarantine of new animals. Do not introduce animals from unknown health status. Report suspected cases immediately as it's a notifiable disease .\tab Isolate sick animals. Provide soft feed if mouth sores are painful. Disinfect housing and equipment thoroughly. Expect full recovery in uncomplicated cases, but productivity may be temporarily reduced.\par
Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) \tab Cattle, Sheep, Goats\tab Symptoms: Firm, raised sores (nodules) all over the hair coat, foul body odor, not feeding, fever. Signs: Very contagious and often fatal.\tab Tetracycline antibiotics.\tab Vaccination is the most effective prevention. Control insect vectors (flies, mosquitoes) which spread the disease.\tab Isolate affected animals immediately. Supportive care with good nutrition and pain relief. Culling severely affected animals may be necessary to prevent suffering and spread.\par
Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia (CCPP) \tab Goats\tab Symptoms: Excessive coughing, labored breathing, nasal discharge, diarrhea, weight loss. Signs: Highly contagious, affects the lungs, often fatal.\tab Penicillin.\tab A specific vaccine exists for CCPP. Minimize mixing of goats from different herds. Good ventilation in housing is critical.\tab Isolate sick goats. Provide a stress-free, dry environment. Antibiotics are most effective in early stages. Recovered animals may have permanent lung damage.\par
East Coast Fever (ECF) \tab Cattle\tab Symptoms: Diarrhea, bloody urine, weakness, swollen joints, excessive salivation, labored breathing, no milk letdown. Signs: Upon slaughter, the meat is yellow and has a foul smell.\tab No specific treatment identified in the source . Veterinary care is essential.\tab The primary prevention is tick control through regular dipping or spraying, as ticks transmit the disease.\tab Prognosis is poor without prompt veterinary intervention. Focus on rigorous tick control to prevent outbreaks. Recovered animals become carriers.\par
Malignant Catarrhal Fever (MCF) \tab Cattle\tab Symptoms: Blindness, rough hair coat, weak joints, dry mouth, wailing sound, restlessness, head shaking, circling, tail may fall off. Signs: No cure, often fatal.\tab No cure. Treatment is supportive to relieve symptoms.\tab Prevent contact between cattle and wildebeest (or sheep, depending on the virus strain). Do not house cattle near lambing sheep.\tab Focus on prevention as the disease is almost always fatal. Affected animals should be euthanized on welfare grounds.\par
Bovine Ephemeral Fever (Three-Day Sickness) \tab Cattle\tab Symptoms: Excessive salivation, shivering, hard stool, no milk letdown, sudden lameness. Signs: Rarely kills the animal directly, but recumbent animals can suffer from other issues.\tab Supportive care: anti-inflammatories to reduce fever and pain. The traditional method of warming the animal (e.g., sun) helps with shivering .\tab Control insect vectors (mosquitoes, biting midges) which spread the virus. Vaccines are available in some regions.\tab Ensure recumbent animals have good footing (soft bedding), are turned regularly, and have access to water and feed. Recovery is usually spontaneous within a few days.\par
Enterotoxemia (Overeating Disease) \tab Sheep, Goats\tab Symptoms: Sudden onset, healthy animals found dead. Upon slaughter, blood clots are noticed in the body. Signs: Animals die very quickly without showing prior illness.\tab Often too late for treatment due to rapid death. High doses of antitoxin and antibiotics (penicillin) may help in early stages.\tab Vaccination is highly effective and crucial, especially for young, fast-growing animals. Avoid sudden access to large amounts of grain or rich feed.\tab Focus on prevention. For animals showing signs, isolate and provide intensive nursing care. Increase fiber and reduce concentrate feeds.\par
Coenurosis (Gid, Sturdy) \tab Sheep, Goats (mostly goats)\tab Symptoms: Circling, head pressing, blindness, emaciation, intense bellowing, ear touching causes pain, diarrhea. Signs: Caused by tapeworm larvae in the brain. No effective treatment.\tab Tetracycline and other measures (ear cutting, sugar water) are generally ineffective .\tab Break the life cycle: Do not feed dogs (the definitive host) raw sheep or goat heads/brains. Properly dispose of carcasses.\tab No recovery guidelines. Prevention is the only solution. Affected animals should be culled to prevent suffering.\par
Trypanosomiasis (Nagana) \tab Cattle\tab Symptoms: Malnourishment (emaciation), dry mouth, hard black dung, swelling of front limbs, no milk letdown. Signs: Blood clots found after death. Highly fatal.\tab Specific trypanocidal drugs (e.g., Veriben).\tab Control the tsetse fly vector. Prevent animals from grazing in high-risk, mountainous areas during fly seasons.\tab Prompt treatment is essential. Recovered animals may remain weak and unthrifty. Work with a vet for correct drug dosage.\par
Anthrax \tab Cattle, Sheep, Goats\tab Symptoms: Sudden death (often the first sign). In live animals: high fever, staggering, difficulty breathing, bloody discharge from orifices. Signs: Rapidly fatal septicemia.\tab Do not treat. Report immediately. Antibiotics (penicillin) can work in early stages but are rarely used due to risk.\tab Vaccination in endemic areas. Do not disturb soil or carcasses in outbreak areas. This is a zoonotic disease and a serious human health risk.\tab Do not open a dead animal suspected of anthrax. It causes spores to form. Incinerate or deeply bury the carcass with lime. Report to veterinary authorities.\par
Actinobacillosis (Wooden Tongue) \tab Cattle, Sheep (not goats)\tab Symptoms: Difficulty eating, anorexia, excessive salivation. Signs: Soft-tissue swelling, abscesses, and draining tracts on the head, neck, and especially the tongue, which becomes hard and wooden.\tab High doses of antibiotics (sulfonamides, tetracyclines, ampicillin) for a long duration. Sodium iodide is also used.\tab Prevent oral wounds by removing coarse or sharp materials from feed. Provide soft feed to affected animals.\tab Prognosis is fair with prolonged treatment. Isolate affected animals to prevent spread of pus. Culling may be economical for severe cases.\par
Arcanobacteriosis (Lumpy Jaw) \tab Cattle (rare in sheep/goats)\tab Symptoms: Painful eating, weight loss. Signs: A firm, non-painful, immovable swelling on the jawbone (mandible). Draining tracts may develop.\tab Extended therapy with Penicillin, ampicillin, or amoxicillin. Isoniazid can be used in non-pregnant cattle.\tab Prevent oral wounds by removing coarse or sharp materials from feed. The prognosis is often poor.\tab Culling is often recommended as the infection is deep in the bone and very difficult to cure.\par
Omphalophlebitis (Navel/Joint Ill) \tab Young Calves, Lambs, Kids\tab Symptoms: Depression, anorexia. Signs: Painful, swollen navel; purulent discharge from navel; swollen, painful joints (joint ill); may progress to septicemia.\tab Prompt, aggressive antibiotic therapy (broad-spectrum). Cleaning and disinfecting the navel.\tab At birth, dip the navel cord in a strong 7% tincture of iodine. Ensure calving/lambing areas are clean, dry, and well-bedded.\tab Early treatment is critical for survival. Recovered animals may have permanent joint damage and poor growth. Cull severely affected calves.\par
\f1\u-10179?\u-9055?\f0  General Prevention: The Foundation of Herd Health\par
Across all search results, the single most emphasized theme is that prevention is far better and more economical than cure . A proactive health plan is your best tool. Key strategies include:\par
\par
Biosecurity: This is your farm's first line of defense. It includes quarantining new animals for 2-4 weeks, controlling visitor access and ensuring they use clean footwear, and cleaning/disinfecting equipment and vehicles between farms .\par
\par
Vaccination: Work with your veterinarian to develop a vaccination protocol for diseases like FMD, LSD, CCPP, Enterotoxemia, and Anthrax .\par
\par
Husbandry: Good nutrition, clean water, adequate ventilation in housing, and low-stress handling significantly boost animals' natural immunity and resilience .\par
\par
Regular Monitoring: Observe your animals daily. Early identification of signs like reduced feed intake, lethargy, or isolation from the herd allows for rapid intervention .\par
\par
\f2\u-10178?\u-8582?\f0  General Guidelines for Managing Sick Animals\par
When an animal does get sick, acting quickly and correctly can save lives and prevent a herd-wide outbreak.\par
\par
Isolate Immediately: Remove sick animals from the healthy herd and place them in a designated sick pen. This pen should be cleaned and disinfected after use and should not be used for healthy animals, especially calving .\par
\par
Prompt Diagnosis and Treatment: Contact your veterinarian for a confirmed diagnosis. Follow their treatment plan precisely, completing the full course of antibiotics even if the animal appears better.\par
\par
Supportive Care: Provide sick animals with easy access to fresh water and high-quality, palatable feed. Soft bedding will help recumbent animals. Reducing stress is a critical part of therapy.\par
\par
Hygiene Protocol: After handling sick animals, always change your clothes and disinfect your boots and any equipment used (e.g., feeding buckets, halters) before returning to the healthy herd .\par
}
 